Master ICT4DUNIT 3Module 1: ICT FOR CIVIC DATAProf. CŽdric Lombion Å Civic Literacy InitiativeLecture 1 - 9th March 2026Introduction to the data pipeline and AI for CSOs Topic: Data pipeline, AI: why, when, who, what, how? LLM -->Large Language ModelIt is used to talk to new generation of AI tools because they work with a great amount of data. If you train a certain model with attention mechanism the tool is going to predict the next word, and it has this ability thanks to the great amount of information. It calculates the probability of what is the most reasonable word. Itís generative AI, so the most common we know. They are not a single model, but a mix of experts. The small model has a small amount of data, but it is trained to interpret. Somehow, if you change topic suddenly, it cannot understand and start mix topics. When you talk to ppl that works with AI, they say that the hallucination itís not weird, but they are just in default mode.AI agentsAutonomy and specialization. Not AI chatbot, but AI agents. If I am talking with an AI agent I am not talking with one model, but there are more models based on the query. AI chatbot when itís thinking they are basically talking to itself: query expansion, to give as much context as possible. Close to magic but essentially predictability.Anxiety for AI: they go off the cloud, itís as it gets lost, maybe they relate to data that speak about that, but itís not like they can feel it. The complexity of the tool, that uses our human words and reflect our worlds in a certain way, itís in the things it predicts Objective --> how AI itís in the data work we have to do as ppl working in the civic sectorThe data pipeline (https://civicliteraci.es/data-pipeline/ )The school of data = open data movement, a program that expanded very quickly. One of the key resources around data work that itís very useful itís the data pipeline. When we try to work with data one of the challenges itís to understand the quality, but also in between there is challenges. I know that I need to use data, I know that I need it for my business, my project, but where is the data that itís actually useful? Nowhere to start is one of the biggest challenges. The data pipeline is a 7 steps process that give you the pieces that stay with you from the beginning to the end of the project. It can be a loop, but we donít have to use it in circle:- Define: what question are you trying to answer?- Find: what data exists that could help?- Get: how do you acquire that data?- Verify: can you trust what you got?- Clean: is it in a usable shape?- Analyse: what does it tell you?- Present: how do you communicate the findings? If you want to use AI to gather data, we have prepared ourselves to put some boundaries and using the data pipeline can help to not fall in the ØmagicÆ of AI.Definition of data for me --> numbers but also facts, countering of facts but also analysis of numbers and facts.Lecture 2 - 12th March 2026Data pipeline: Structure the thinking of how to deliver data workFrom Problem Definition to Data CollectionExample: how OpenElenctions standardizes US election data (https://thescoop.org/archives/2025/06/09/how-openelections-uses-llms/ )The OpenElenctions project collects, cleans and publishes election results from all 50 US states in a single standardized format. The goal is to deliver CSV files (comma-separated values)The pipeline structures didnít change. The AI was added at one step only, one tool changed: ØgetÆ. Verification, cleaning and human editorial judgment stayed the same.Exercise: Where does AI Fit?Summarise: AI can misunderstand or misinterpret the goal we asked. It reads the paper but when it summarises sometimes is from the paper sometimes is from its network. It interprets instead of summarising. It tends to search for what you might ask after. You have to structure what you thought a simple process in a difficult one, you need to know how to approach the topic properly and give it structured.You can always use AI, constrain, but it does not do the job the way you want it to be because it always interprets. It cannot see the context, the more it has context the more it can try to resonate but we canít be 100% sure it is want you requested.AI transforms the Get and Clean stepsVery little is said to use AI to define, verify and analyse somethingCleaning can become the process to have digestible elements to have interesting information to analyse later.The Get StepWhere is data found?Open data portal: open access. Appeared in 2009 when people created portal with lots of data that everyone could access. State and organization, but also individual can have an open data nameAPI: Application Programming Interface --> interact with each other and exchange data. Structured way to access data, like where you are trying to receive information and you put your personal information. The interface gives just the information that you request because it already has the data you need.RECUPERAREOCR: optical character recognition -->  used to extract information from images and some pdf if there is an image wrapped in itJSON: lingua franca of APIWhen you use AI you can do more but at the same time you have to things more precisely.RECUPERARE SLIDEWhat does it look like an AI agent?We will learn to use tools used by developers but as collaborators. So, we have to understand how developers work, they work on texts. We will use a GitHub.Commit: confirm to the program that there is a change, itís like the save in microsoft